---
title: Java 计算程序运行时间
mathjax: true
date: 2019-03-12 18:46:20
updated:
categories:
tags:
urlname: java-program-time-measurement
---



<!-- more -->

# 使用 System.NanoTime()

[System.NanoTime() - Java Docs](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/System.html#nanoTime--)

>     public static long nanoTime()
> 
> Returns the current value of the running Java Virtual Machine's high-resolution time source, in nanoseconds.
>
> This method can only be used to measure elapsed time and is not related to any other notion of system or wall-clock time. The value returned represents nanoseconds since some fixed but arbitrary *origin* time (perhaps in the future, so values may be negative). The same origin is used by all invocations of this method in an instance of a Java virtual machine; other virtual machine instances are likely to use a different origin.
>
> This method provides nanosecond precision, but not necessarily nanosecond resolution (that is, how frequently the value changes) - no guarantees are made except that the resolution is at least as good as that of [`currentTimeMillis()`](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/System.html#currentTimeMillis--).
>
> Differences in successive calls that span greater than approximately 292 years ($2^{63}$ nanoseconds) will not correctly compute elapsed time due to numerical overflow.
>
> The values returned by this method become meaningful only when the difference between two such values, obtained within the same instance of a Java virtual machine, is computed.
>
> For example, to measure how long some code takes to execute:
>
> ```
long startTime = System.nanoTime();
// ... the code being measured ...
long estimatedTime = System.nanoTime() - startTime;
```
> 
> {% codeblock %}
long startTime = System.nanoTime();
// ... the code being measured ...
long estimatedTime = System.nanoTime() - startTime;
{% endcodeblock %}
>
> To compare two nanoTime values
>
> ```
> long t0 = System.nanoTime();
> ...
> long t1 = System.nanoTime();
> ```
>
> one should use `t1 - t0 < 0`, not `t1 < t0`, because of the possibility of numerical overflow.
>
> - **Returns:**
>
> the current value of the running Java Virtual Machine's high-resolution time source, in nanoseconds
>
> - **Since:**
>
> 1.5
>

## 示例

```java
long startTime;
long durationNanoSecond;
double durationMicroSecond;

startTime = System.nanoTime();
doSomething();
durationNanoSecond = System.nanoTime() - startTime;
durationMicroSecond = durationNanoSecond / 1_000;
```

# 使用 System.currentTimeMillis()

> ```
> public static long currentTimeMillis()
> ```
>
> Returns the current time in milliseconds. Note that while the unit of time of the return value is a millisecond, the granularity of the value depends on the underlying operating system and may be larger. For example, many operating systems measure time in units of tens of milliseconds.
>
> See the description of the class `Date` for a discussion of slight discrepancies that may arise between "computer time" and coordinated universal time (UTC).
>
> - **Returns:**
>
>   the difference, measured in milliseconds, between the current time and midnight, January 1, 1970 UTC.
>
> - **See Also:**
>
>   [`Date`](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/util/Date.html)

## 示例

```java
long startTime = System.currentTimeMillis();
doSomeThing();
long duration = System.currentTimeMillis() - startTime;
System.out.printf("[Duration]%d ms", duration);
```

## 可能的误差

`System.currentTimeMillis()` 在部分 Windows 系统中可能存在 10ms 的误差。有人说在他的游戏程序中使用 `nanoTime()` 之后比使用 `currentTimeMillis()` 的时候游戏画面过渡更平滑。

# 参考资料

1. [System.NanoTime() - Java Docs](https://docs.oracle.com/javase/8/docs/api/java/lang/System.html#nanoTime--)
2. [System.currentTimeMillis vs System.nanoTime - Stack Overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/351565/system-currenttimemillis-vs-system-nanotime)
3. [java中的System.nanoTime与System.currentTime - 博客园](https://www.cnblogs.com/_programmer/p/3396933.html)
4. [How to convert nanoseconds to seconds using the TimeUnit enum?  - Stack Overflow](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/924208/how-to-convert-nanoseconds-to-seconds-using-the-timeunit-enum)
5. [使用System.nanoTime测试代码执行时间](http://wengyiming.cn/2016/11/02/%E4%BD%BF%E7%94%A8System-nanoTime%E6%B5%8B%E8%AF%95%E4%BB%A3%E7%A0%81%E6%89%A7%E8%A1%8C%E6%97%B6%E9%97%B4/)